[Music]
Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to introduce a very interesting sir dual aspect
to the notion of integral linear spaces we're
going to investigate given a bunch of em sets the
relations satisfied by that group or collection
or bunch of em sets so for example suppose that
we have a B and C and these are some kind of
em sets a perhaps has elements a a and beta B
has elements a beta bar or the ante of beta square
and C has elements a beta beta square bar now what
are a beta and square well they're just some kind
of mathematical objects that have arisen in some
kind of theory that we're working in so these are
rather general kinds of things and we can look at
these three empaths and we now know that we can
create a very interesting algebraic object from
them an integral linear space which is just taking
linear combinations with integral coefficients of
these three M sets but in our last video we also
introduced the idea that it's interesting to
discuss the relations that might be satisfied by a
bunch of em sets like this now in this particular
case these three M sets have the relation a equals
B plus C in other words if we take these two FS
and we add them then we get to 2 a's the beta
bar here and the beta and the beta combined to
give us a single beta and the square and the anti
square combine to give us nothing so yes indeed B
plus C equals a that's a relation satisfied by
these 3 m sets and we have some choices how to
express this relation so we could also express
it in this way that a minus B minus C equals
zero because remember we have the technology
to talk about differences of em sets as well
as sums we're working in an integral framework
here we've introduced the ante or bar operation
exactly so that we have this facility working in
an integral setting so this is quite interesting
that we have now to kind of dual things that
we can do with these 3m sets on the one hand
we can look at their I span they're integral span
we get an integral linear space on the other hand
we can now investigate the relations satisfied by
them and we're going to see that these two things
are in some sense kind of symmetrical maybe
almost two sides of a coin so today we want to
investigate this other side of the coin the idea
of investigating relations between em sense what
makes this story interesting is that a given bunch
of em cept can actually have quite a few different
relations so for example here are four em sex d
e f and g and we're not being too specific about
what their entries are we're just using some
kind of label to represent some priorly defined
objects so there's an X here denoting something
rather there's a square and then it's sort of an
upside-down t so these are symbols representing
something which we assume have already been
clearly defined and we know exactly what these
things are and these individual objects are not
problematic but there's only these three different
types of them occurring in all four different I
am set together with the occasional bar of one
or more of the elements okay so if you stare at
these four em sets for a while you can convince
yourself that in this case we have more than
relation we have in fact these two relations that
D minus e plus F equals zero what does that mean
okay so if we take d and we subtract e and we add
F we get zero that's really the same as saying
that D plus F equals e that's maybe a little bit
easier for us to check so we take D and F and add
them what do we get here there's two x's 2 x's a
total of four X's here there's a square no square
a total of one square here it's four of these
upside down teas and here there's one more so
we get all together five of them so yes indeed d
plus F equals E which we can rewrite as d minus
a plus f equal zero but there's another relation
which is maybe a little bit trickier to find which
is that three times this 1 minus two times this
1 plus this 1 equals 0 and maybe it's easier for
us to check that in the form 3 D plus G equal to e
so let's check that 3d plus G and hopefully that's
equal to two times this one so if we take three
times this one we're going to get 6x is there plus
another to that is yes indeed 2 times 4 x's how
many squares will be three squares there plus a
square bar or anti square in for a total of two
squares which is two times what's there and the
number of these upside down tees there's a going
to be 3 times 4 that's 12 of them and then we're
going to have to add these two auntie of them so
that's a total of ten and that's indeed two times
the number in that stuff that e.m set so yes this
relation is also satisfied so these two relations
are essentially different ok this one and this one
are in some sense independent just because we know
this relation is true doesn't mean that this one
follows and similarly these are not really the
only two relations satisfied by these four Amplatz
because we can take linear combination such
relations and that will give us other relations
that are satisfied that's an interesting idea that
we can take linear combinations of relations to
give us new relations for example we could take
the sum of these two relations that would be for D
minus 3 E Plus F plus G equals 0 that's also going
to be a true relation and we could do a lot more
complicated things we could take you know 27 times
this first relation and subtract one hundred and
four times that relation that would give us yet
another relation so we see that the relations
themselves are acting a little bit like our em
feds under integral linear combinations suggesting
that maybe they themselves have something of an
integral linear space structure that's a very
interesting idea so now let's look at how we
actually obtain relations from our row reduction
algorithm let's go back to an example that figured
in matte foundations to to to where we were
talking about the I span of these four vectors
nine 11-12 2 6 10 and 0 14 in that video I went
through our algorithm to find a hermit normal form
and we eventually found that the I span of these
four vectors was really the same as the I span of
three 1 0 2 so that we're actually getting a two
dimensional lattice as the the I span of this and
here are two very nice basis vectors okay so I you
can remind yourself about how that goes but what's
going to be pertinent for us today is looking at
these 20 rows that have been obtained so whenever
we do this algorithm which by now is reasonably
familiar you will know that we create a new
all at the same time we scratch off or eliminate
a previous row and generally we put a new number
of the role except in the situation where we get
a 0 r 0 the 0 rows are not going to contribute
substantially meaningfully to our span so we
ignore them and so that's the place where the
number of vectors and our spanning set actually
actually decreases okay because we're putting in
a row of zeros removing some prior role but not
really including that role zeros as a new vector
so our spanning set decreases until eventually
we end up with just a spanning set which is a
basis or which is minimal so we've gone from
four original vectors to two vectors happen to
be these ones and we've been able to go from four
to two by having these 20 rows up here during the
algorithm we want to now have a closer look at
these zero rows and we'll see that each one of
those corresponds to a relation so let's have
a look at this first zero row which is really
telling us that the empty set which is the M set
that's really standing for this this vector is 0 0
that's actually the combination row 4 minus seven
times row eight now row 4 minus seven or eight
can be rewritten because row eight is actually
row seven minus Rho 60 we can replace that there
to get row 4 plus 7 times what I'm going to do
now is I can replace seven with 3-2 row five and
place six with two plus 405 ok so we've rewritten
this thing here replace the fix with this and the
seven with that and then when we expand this
we have seven row tues minus seven row threes a
single row four and a total number of row 5s is
28 there + 14 a total of forty two row five and
then finally the row 5 which is Row 1 minus Row
3 can be replaced so there's a row 1 minus Row 3
there so all together we'll have 42 row ones still
seven row tues now we said we're going to subtract
these ones so we have minus 42 row 3-7 the total
of minus 49 row 3 s plus a single row 4 so we
reduce going back up the tree till we just have
a relation involving our original four vectors
and that's been a relation between those original
four vectors telling us that 42 times this 1 plus
7 times this 1 minus 49 times this 1 plus this one
is the empty em set or the row of zeros what you'd
appreciate it that's a relatively non trivial
kind of calculation right if you're trying just
by high school methods to figure out what kind
of relation there might be between these you may
have to work somehow this is very systematic way
of getting this really quite non-trivial relations
between the original four vectors but there's
also this second row of zeros which corresponds
to a different relation and we can unravel that
so this one here is 6 minus 38 we can replace the
six with that we will place the eighth with that
are we going through a similar kind of thing i'll
let you check that we end up getting 22 times row
1 plus 4 root row 2 minus plus 5 Row 3 equals the
empty and set or the rolls ears so that's another
relation satisfied by these four original vectors
so we have a spanning set originally of four
vectors we found these two relations which are
exactly obtained from these zero rows appearing
in our current meet normal form algorithm and from
them we're able to extract these two relations
that this equals zero and that this equals zero
so it's a very efficient use of this algorithm
we're using all parts of the algorithm now all
right first of all to obtain the basis itself
and then to obtain the the relations or at
least some sort of defining relations that that
characterize these original four vectors so to
summarize what we just did we started out with
these four vectors labeled one two three four
we found out that the integral linear span of
those four vectors is the same as the integral
span of these two vectors so we found a
basis for this integral linear space and
we've established that the relation satisfied by
these four vectors include these two particular
relations corresponding to the two rows that
we've obtained during that algorithm so the
number of relations that we've obtained here
correspond to the number of zero row vectors
produced in our meet normal form algorithm
if we had obtained seven rosy rose during the
course of the more complicated algorithm then we
could deduce that there had to be seven of these
sort of essential relations for basis relations
almost satisfied by whatever original spanning
set we had and the number of relations here then
corresponds to the difference between the number
of vectors in the original spanning set this case
for and the number of vectors in the final basis
start off with a certain number of vectors
in the spanning set we do our row reduction
algorithm we obtain a certain number of zero
rows each one of those zero rows corresponds
to essentially dropping a vector from our
spanning set so the initial spanning set
and the final minimal spanning set the
difference between those two is exactly
the number of relations that were obtaining
in this way so 4 minus 2 is the two that's
counting the number of relations this relation
between these quantities can be rewritten this
way that the number of vectors in the
original spanning set is equal to the
number of vectors in a basis plus the
number of relations that we're getting
so if we start with four vectors in a spanning set
and we ended up with two vectors in our basis then
there will have to be two relations to make these
things balanced it's a kind of easy consequence of
the the way the algorithm works this is in fact
our version in this context of a very important
theorem in linear algebra called a rank nullity
theorem we'll talk about that a little bit later
in our next video okay but it's a very important
relation that here we can see a very direct and
kind of obvious almost manifestation okay this is
a nothing deep or mysterious about it we're just
reducing the number of vectors in our spanning
sets by obtaining 0 rows and we're touting the
number of 0 rows and that's how many relations
there are but the way we phrase this is real not
the complete story because it's not really that
there is exactly two relations satisfied by our
four vectors and the reason is because as we've
seen before a linear combination of relations is
also relation so if we look at the two relations
that we've established this one's the first one
and this was the second one we could perhaps
represent these relations by recording these
coefficients that's a kind of a natural thing to
do so that first relation kind of corresponds to
the number 42 seven minus forty-nine one we could
perhaps string goes together in a list or another
kind of vector and maybe we could say use pointed
brackets to in our minds separate the role of
this kind of vector from the other vectors
that we're considering this second relation
22 1 plus 42 s minus twenty five threes would
be represented by this relational vector 22 4
minus 20 50 ok but we could take these relations
and we conform combinations of them for example
we could add these two relations giving this one
here which corresponds to just of course adding
the corresponding relational vectors 6411 minus
70 for one or maybe we could take the difference
first relation- the second relation that we get
this one here which would correspond to just a
difference between these relational vectors for
2-22 is 20 is difference here is 3 the difference
here is minus 24 and one and of course we could
take more complicated linear combinations as well
so the relations themselves form an integral
linear space this is a beautiful and important
understanding that the relations themselves
form an integral linear space in some sense
we have these sort of two basic ones but
integral linear combinations of them are
also relations will also deserve to be included
in the sort of relational space satisfied by our
for initial vectors okay so how are we going to
put our finger exactly on what's going on here
in terms of the relations satisfied by an M set
of em since we want to set up some notation that
effectively captures this language of relations
and allows us to talk about relations as objects
themselves so let's look at an example to
try to orient ourselves here are three MSS
again there in terms of some mystery symbols
exes and squares so they just stand for some
priorly defined mathematical objects which we
understand completely okay so here is a which
is X square X here's B squared squared xx xx + C
is X square X square X square X square X X X X I'm
mixing things up a little bit just to remind you
that these things really are unordered we don't
always have to insist on all of the x's being
together and all the square is being together
and so on right okay what relations are satisfied
well it's a relatively simple situation because
it turns out that two times a is equal to B and a
plus B plus a equals C ok that's the long-winded
way of saying that to a plus B equals C but it's
you know it's still a valid kind of equation and
c is equal to two times B so these are amongst the
relations satisfied by these three subsets okay so
we'd like to introduce a kind of an object that
captures these relations so let's try something
like this let's try to define a space initially
say rel for relation r l of ABC here we have
3m fits the M set of those 3m sets and we're
interested in the relation satisfied by these
three mfest a B and C okay if we look at these
relations we can see that this one here is really
a consequence of these two because if C equals to
be and to a equals B then this here this is just 2
a's really the same as B and so this left-hand
side is really B plus B which is to be that's
equal to see that's just a repetition of this
one here this relation is not really different
are separate from these two themselves so in terms
of a sort of a minimal defining relational sets
we could say okay to a minus B and C minus 2b or
perhaps some kind of minimal relations so we could
think about that we can think about creating an M
set consisting of these expressions to a minus B
and C minus to be that kind of perhaps captures
the the relations or at least sort of spanning
set for the relations between a and B okay so
there's a question mark over here this is just
a preliminary kind of attempt okay to try to set
up what we might mean by the relation satisfied
by a bee and three and a natural question is does
this work is this a satisfactory answer to what we
want to do so there's a good opportunity here
for you to do a little bit of exploration I'm
going to give you a very interesting exercise
at the end of the next slide for something to
think about in terms of source structuring
mathematics some structural challenging
question ahead of you but you might already
start thinking here does this work I mean is
this a satisfactory kind of setup of trying to
capture the relations formed by these three FS
you
so hope you gave that some thought and I hope
that you agree with me that this original attempt
this first attempt is really not very successful
defining relations of a B and C to B this M set
consisting of the expression to a minus B and C
minus 2b is not really a good definition for two
reasons first of all since if you actually think
about this expression to a minus B okay this has
a prior meaning because a and B are explicit
em sets so to a minus B that's something that
we already have a prior meaning to that's the
linear combination of the M sets a and B and
it's like we know that that linear combination
is actually the empty em set similarly we know
that this combination is actually the mtm set so
if we're going to write something like this then
someone else is allowed to come along and say
but wait a minute this thing here is actually
the empty em set as is this thing here so what
you've really written down is relations between
a B and C is the M set consisting of two empty
em sets and once you write it this way then it
becomes vacuous you're not saying anything
anymore the second reason why this is not
such a good idea is because it doesn't distinguish
between these two relations this should be these
these two relations and other possibilities for
example if we had replaced this one here with the
equivalent one a plus B plus a equals C little
more awkward but it's still generating the same
space of relations then this looks different from
this so this is an initial stab at defining the
relations between a bunch of em sets but it's not
a satisfactory resolution to this question so I'm
going to leave this to you now as an exercise
for the next little while until our next video
I want you to think about how you might set up a
theory of relations amongst em sets in a way this
is a very fundamental question we have em sets
in mathematics here we have a bunch of em sets
we've written them down we'd like to describe the
relation satisfied by these em sets we'd like to
have a consistent and clear notational convention
for how to describe and get at and specify the
relation satisfied by these given em sets okay
ously in fact a very very fundamental kind of
thing that we want to do and how are we going to
exactly do it so I'm going to give you my solution
next time but I think it's really great for you
to think about this yourself how would you go
about it if you had to define this thing you know
what is the definition of rel ABC going to be in
a way that effectively captures what we want from
the relations between these three M sets or more
generally a bunch of em sets or multi set of em
sets so a bit of a challenge for you to hell go
and see if you can come up with a good definition
will come together and share our views with our
next video I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for listening [Music] bye